In the study by [Priesler et al.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378112717304772), machine learning was applied to predict forest mortality based on various historical factors such as precipitation levels, neighboring mortality rates, and elevation. For their research, Priesler utilized a general additive model (GAM) to generate these predictions. In order to replicate this work, we utilized a similar dataset but replaced a GAM with a dense neural network and conducted a regression analysis on a 0-1 scale. Our model produced projections with comparable accuracy to Priesler’s results. 

Our current approach is based on supervised learning, as the model is trained on data that represents forest mortality each subsequent year. Using this framework, the model is able to learn from labeled data in which the mortality outcomes each year are known, allowing the model to predict future mortality with greater accuracy.

Moving forward, our project aims to explore alternative machine learning methods, such as AutoKeras, an automated system designed to optimize a machine learning model. Additionally, we aim to explain existing Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks using SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) to identify which variables have the greatest impact on the predictions.  

Ultimately, our goal is to generalize these methods and test them on a broader, more diverse dataset. By improving predictions of forest mortality, we can gain deeper insights into factors that affect forest health, and inform effective management strategies, tailored to account for significant variables. 
